Calculating short spectra
=========================

We start by importing the necessary libraries. Including the module
``specwizard.Phys`` that contains the ``ReadPhys`` function that
contains a set of physical constants.

.. code:: ipython3

    import specwizard
    import numpy as np
    from specwizard import Phys
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    constants = Phys.ReadPhys()


.. parsed-literal::

    first
    This class defines the B-spline kernel of Monaghan and Lattanzio, as used in Gadget-2


As always, the first step of for doing calculations. We initilize the
``specwizard.Build_Input`` module to generate the ``Wizard`` dictionary,
in this case we will load it from a ``YAML`` file using the
``read_from_yml`` function.

.. code:: ipython3

    build_input = specwizard.Build_Input()

.. code:: ipython3

    Wizard = build_input.read_from_yml(yml_file='Wizard.yml')


.. parsed-literal::

    Warning! SightLength NOT found. Setting default value: 1


Now we can simply run ``specwizard.GenerateShortSpectra``. This will
read the simulation data and according to the parameters given in the
``Wizard`` dictionary will form a sight line, and load all the necessary
information for the calculation of the optical depth. Later the
sightline particles physical properties are projected into velocity
pixels. These properties will be weighted by the total mass of particles
that are contributing to a specific pixel, by the fraction of each
element and by ion. Finally with this projection we will calculate the
Optical Depth of each ion that was asked in the ``Wizard`` dictionary.

When we run ``specwizard.GenerateShortSpectra`` it will return
``optical_depth,projected_data,sim_data`` which are python dictionaries
that contains the informaiton of each of the step described above. If
one desire to just use one of the data the assigned python charecter
``_`` can be used, for example if only we care about the optical depth
we can use ``OD,_,_ = specwizard.GenerateShortSpectra(Wizard)``

.. code:: ipython3

    optical_depth,projected_data,snap_data = specwizard.GenerateShortSpectra(Wizard=Wizard)


.. parsed-literal::

    /cosma7/data/dp004/dc-aram1/pyspecwizard_main/gitcontrol/specwizard/specwizard/specwizard/SpecWizard_ComputeOpticaldepth.py:294: RuntimeWarning: invalid value encountered in sqrt
      bions_kms = np.sqrt(2 * self.constants["kB"] * Tions / weight) / 1e5


.. code:: ipython3

    snap_data['Particles']['Densities']




.. parsed-literal::

    {'Value': array([0.616979  , 0.26902097, 0.5525248 , ..., 2.3348951 , 2.4020216 ,
            3.1862082 ], dtype=float32),
     'Info': {'CGSConversionFactor': 6.769911178294543e-31,
      'VarDescription': 'Ion mass-densities',
      'aexp-scale-exponent': -3.0,
      'h-scale-exponent': 2.0}}



.. code:: ipython3

    projected_data['Mass-weighted']['Densities']




.. parsed-literal::

    {'Value': array([1.73718766, 1.57875629, 1.38362337, ..., 1.92713224, 1.91495362,
            1.85163886]),
     'Info': {'CGSConversionFactor': 6.769911178294543e-31,
      'VarDescription': 'Ion mass-densities',
      'aexp-scale-exponent': -3.0,
      'h-scale-exponent': 2.0}}



To illustrate the outputs we will generate a set of plots that shows the
different contents from the returned dictionaries.

.. code:: ipython3

    positions         = snap_data["Particles"]["Positions"] # We load the positions from the simulation data LOS 
    densities         = snap_data["Particles"]["Densities"] # We do the same for the density 
    projected_density = projected_data["Mass-weighted"]['Densities']['Value'] # We load the Mass-weighted density from the projected pixel data. 
    OD           = optical_depth[('Hydrogen', 'H I')]['Optical depths']['Value'] # We load the Optical depth
    elementnames = Wizard["ionparams"]["Ions"] # We get the name of the ions that we used 

We can examine what is inside these fields:



.. code:: ipython3

    
    fontsize= 20
    ix           = Wizard['sightline']["x-axis"] ; iy = Wizard['sightline']["y-axis"] ; iz = Wizard['sightline']["z-axis"]
    positions    = snap_data["Particles"]["Positions"]
    densities    = snap_data["Particles"]["Densities"]
    OD           = optical_depth[('Hydrogen', 'H I')]['Optical depths']['Value']
    elementnames = Wizard["ionparams"]["Ions"]
    #
    zpos = positions["Value"][:,iz]
    rho  = densities["Value"]
    
    # parameters of projection
    pixz = projected_data["pixel"]["Value"] * np.arange(projected_data["npix"])
                       
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(20, 12))
    
    title = r"$z=$"+str(round(Wizard["Header"]["Cosmo"]["Redshift"],2))
    
    # plot particle density
    ax[0].set_title(title, fontsize=fontsize)
    ax[0].plot(zpos, np.log10(rho), ',', label='SPH')
    ax[0].plot(pixz, np.log10(projected_data["Mass-weighted"]['Densities']['Value']), color='r', label='Projected (Mass Weighted')
    ax[0].legend(frameon=False)
    ax[0].set_ylabel(r"$\log\rho$", fontsize=fontsize)
    ax[0].set_xlabel(r"$z$", fontsize=fontsize)
    
    
    
    ax[1].plot(OD, label=r'$\tau_{\mathrm{H I}}$')
    
    ax[1].legend(frameon=False, fontsize=fontsize)
    
    
    
    ax[1].set_ylabel(r"$\tau$", fontsize=fontsize)
    ax[1].set_xlabel(r"Velocity [km/s]", fontsize=fontsize)
    
    fig.show()
    
        
    
    




.. image:: /ShortSpectra/notebooks/ShortSpectra_files/ShortSpectra_14_0.png


We can take a deeper look at the output ``project_data`` to understand
better the output. We project the physical properties of the simulation
particles into velocity pixels. This projection is weighted by the total
mass of the particles contributing to a pixel, by itâ€™s element content
and by the ion content.

.. code:: ipython3

    # plot ionization states
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(2, 1, figsize=(20, 12))
    
    # plot ion densities
    ax[0].set_title("Ion densities", fontsize=fontsize)
    for i in np.arange(2):
        for (isys, (element, ion)) in zip(nsys, elementnames):
            color               = cycle[isys]
            element_density     = projected_data["Element-weighted"][element]['Densities']['Value']
            ion_fraction        = projected_data["Ion-weighted"][ion]['Densities']['Value']
            ratio               = ion_fraction / element_density
            ax[i].plot(pixz, np.log10(ratio), color=color, label=r'{}'.format(ion))
        # ax[i].set_ylim(-7,1)
        ax[i].legend(frameon=False, fontsize=fontsize, ncol=4)
        ax[i].set_ylabel(r"$\log n_{\rm ion}/n_{\rm element}$", fontsize=fontsize)
    ax[1].set_xlim(15, 25)
        
        
    fig.show()


.. parsed-literal::

    /tmp/ipykernel_401330/1416116103.py:11: RuntimeWarning: invalid value encountered in divide
      ratio               = ion_fraction / element_density



.. image:: /ShortSpectra/notebooks/ShortSpectra_files/ShortSpectra_16_1.png


.. code:: ipython3

    Numof_Ions = len(elementnames)
    fig, ax  = plt.subplots(Numof_Ions, 1, figsize = (20, 10))
    
    for (i, ion) in zip (np.arange(Numof_Ions), elementnames):
    #    ax[i].set_xlim(0, box_kms)
        try:
            for j in range(5):
                ax[i].plot(( np.exp(-optical_depth[ion]['Optical depths']['Value'])),label = 'sightline# '+str(j))
        except:
            continue
        element, ion_name = ion
        title = r"{}".format(ion_name)
        ax[i].set_title(title)
        ax[i].set_ylabel(r"$\exp(-\tau)$")
        ax[i].set_xlabel(r"$v\ [{\rm km s}^{-1}]$")
       # ax[i].set_xlim(6200,6800)
    fig.tight_layout()
    fig.show()




.. image:: /ShortSpectra/notebooks/ShortSpectra_files/ShortSpectra_17_0.png


.. code:: ipython3

    import unyt

.. code:: ipython3

    unyt.M_sun_cgs




.. parsed-literal::

    unyt_quantity(1.98841586e+33, 'g')



.. code:: ipython3

    unyt.G_cgs




.. parsed-literal::

    unyt_quantity(6.67408e-08, 'cm**3/(g*s**2)')



.. code:: ipython3

    from unyt import unyt_array

.. code:: ipython3

    data = [5,56185,84,2,3,489]

.. code:: ipython3

    msols = unyt_array(data,unyt.Msun)

.. code:: ipython3

    msols.convert_to_cgs()





.. parsed-literal::

    unyt_array([9.94207930e+33, 1.11719145e+38, 1.67026932e+35, 3.97683172e+33,
           5.96524758e+33, 9.72335356e+35], 'g')



